---
title: "Bored in a changing climate: ocean acidification and boring sponge impact on eastern oyster (Crassostrea virginica) gene expression"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2022-brite
venue: "Boston University"
date: 2013-03-01
location: "Boston, Massachusetts"
---

Eastern oyster (Crassostrea virginica) populations are in decline due to ocean acidification, disease, and parasites. Given the broad importance of oysters to the shellfish industry and to ecosystem function through their role as habitat providers, it is critical to study how these threats might interact with each other. The boring sponge (Cliona sp.) negatively affects oyster growth and survival by damaging shell integrity through chemical and mechanical means, potentially impacting oyster resilience to increasing ocean acidification. However, it is unclear how these parasite-host interactions alter the oyster’s molecular response to ocean acidification. Here, we investigated the effects of boring sponge infection on oyster gene expression under ocean acidification conditions. A total of 31 oysters (18 infected, 13 not infected) were reared for 70 days under two acidification treatments representing approximate present day (539 pCO2 - indicating partial pressure of CO2 in µatm) and extreme conditions (3294 µatm). RNA was isolated and sequenced, and gene expression data were analyzed to assess differential expression followed by a weighted gene correlation network analysis (WGCNA) to link phenotypes with gene modules. Sponge-infected oysters in the high pCO2 treatment had 11 differentially expressed genes (DEG) in comparison to the control treatment (no infection, low pCO2) (pADJ=0.05). Other treatment comparisons showed no DEGs. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment of these DEGs identified terms implicated in various physiological functions such as actin synthesis and cell morphogenesis, indicating that the double stressor treatment elicited a stress response that reduced growth. Infected oysters in the high pCO2 treatment exhibited higher gene expression plasticity (distance samples move in principle coordinate space relative to control oyster expression), suggesting that these oysters had to modulate their expression to a greater extent to maintain biological processes. Overall, boring sponge infection combined with ocean acidification appear to induce responses in a small number of genes involved in cell and muscle growth, suggesting that boring sponge infection may impact oyster growth. This work highlights the impacts of multiple stressors on oysters in light of climate change.
