---
title: "PVMS Poster - Characterizing Lineage-Specific and Species-Specific Gene Families in Testate Lobose Amoebae"
collection: talks
type: "Poster Presentation"
permalink: /talks/2023-pvm
venue: "Pioneer Valley Microbiology Symposium"
date: 2014-02-01
location: "Amherst, Massachusetts"
---

Lineage-specific gene families (LSGFs) are defined as genes found in one taxonomic group (i.e. lineage) but not others. Our understanding of the evolution of LSGFs is limited as most studies focus on model organisms, such as Drosophila spp. and Saccharomyces cerevisiae that have complete reference genomes. We work on Arcellinida, an uncultivable clade of so-called ‘shelled amoebae’ whose fossil record dates back ~800 million years. We use single-cell transcriptomic data to explore LSGFs in this
diverse clade. We deploy bioinformatic tools such as a machine-learning algorithm (TIdeS) to identify open-reading frames (ORFs) from transcripts and analyze the results, and then identify gene families. Using scripts written for this project, we identified 122 Arcellinida-specific gene family candidates as well as 126 genes and 92 genes specific to Hyalosphenia papilio and Hyalosphenia elegans, respectively. Our
results show that it is possible to study the evolution of new genes of uncultivable microorganisms using transcriptomic data and bioinformatic tools. Future work includes looking for positive selection signatures in these genes, and finding LSGF evolutionary patterns by mapping the appearance of LSGFs onto the Arcellinida phylogenetic tree. These new genes can give us insight into the population genomics and the evolution patterns of new genes in these understudied taxa.
