---
title: "ISMB Poster Presentation - Parallel evolution of oxidized sugar metabolism in commensal and pathogenic microbes exemplifies bacterial adaptation to the inflamed gut"
collection: talks
type: "Poster Presentation"
permalink: /talks/2024-ismb
venue: "Intelligent Systems For Molecular Biology - EvolCompGen"
date: 2024-07-12
location: "Montréal, Canada"
---

Inflammation-associated perturbations of the gut microbiome are well characterized, but poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that disparate prokaryotic taxa are capable of metabolizing the oxidized sugars glucarate and galactarate, utilizing enzymatically divergent, yet functionally equivalent, gud/gar pathways. We used comparative genomics and knockout experiments to identify a divergent pathway in commensals, which includes a novel 5-KDG aldolase (GudL) and an uncharacterized ABC transporter (GarABC) that recapitulate the function of their nonhomologous counterparts in pathogens. Notably, GudL in commensal bacteria appears to share a similar function to GarL in E. coli, yet the structural and evolutionary divergence of GudL and GarL suggest convergent evolution. We constructed hidden Markov models of each gene in the pathway and performed a systematic bioinformatic search for the gud/gar pathway in the Genome Taxonomy Database, identifying 887 species putatively capable of metabolizing oxidized sugars. These species belong to diverse prokaryotic phyla, including Bacillota, Pseudomonadota, Actinobacteriota, and Fusobacteriota. Phylogenetic reconstructions of the identified gud/gar genes suggest multiple horizontal gene transfer events, notably from Bacillota to Fusobacteriota and between Bacillota and Pseudomonadota. Finally, through metagenomic and metatranscriptomic analyses, we show that the pathways for oxidized sugar metabolism are significantly increased in both Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Overall, this work expanded the annotation of oxidized sugar metabolism from pathogens to specific commensal microbes, and discovered a convergently-evolved 5-KDG aldolase in commensal microbes.

<embed src="https://frikinzi.github.io/files/ISMB2024_1460_Jiang_poster.pdf" width="1000px" height="800px" />